Laura Veirs and...Green Day?

<a href="http://lauraveirs.com/">
  <img class="shadow" src="/laura_veirs.jpg"></a>
<a href="http://greenday.com/">
  <img class="shadow" src="/green_day_american_idiot.jpg"></a>

New music smacked me upside the head recently, and I've enjoyed it enough that I
thought I'd mention it here.

First, [Nick](http://www.stanford.edu/~koshnick/) wrangled everyone to go see
[Laura Veirs](http://lauraveirs.com/) a couple weeks ago. She played at [Bottom
of the Hill](http://bottomofthehill.com/), which has a decades-long tradition of
live music, and hosted the likes of Bad Religion, Fu Manchu, and Beastie Boys
before they hit it big.

More importantly, Bottom of the Hill is conveniently located just a few blocks
from [Kieran](http://civicspacelabs.org/home/blog/kieran) and
[Denise](http://sanjosesquared.blogspot.com/)'s loft, where we pre-partied. And
thank god we did, because the [one warm-up
act](http://www.greatlakeswimmers.com/) we saw was a little lacking. It was
definitely experimental, and minimalist, so maybe it was just over my head...as
well as everyone else's in our group... :P

Laura Veirs herself was great. She has a modernized folk sound, acoustic with
electronic overtones, and she does it well. Her voice sounds better recorded
than live, but it was still fun to see her on stage.

Just a few days later, [Green Day](http://greenday.com/)'s [American
Idiot](http://www.metacritic.com/music/artists/greenday/americanidiot) smacked
me upside the head all over again. [My sister](http://vanessaart.com/) knows
punk music well, and she'd played a few local bands for me before, but American
Idiot was the first punk album I'd ever listened to in its entirety.

Wow. It's a hell of a ride. Granted, Green Day doesn't exactly do complex,
nuanced music or deep, intellectual lyrics, and this album doesn't change that.
Still, it's raw, emotional, and powerful like nothing else I've heard recently.
On top of that, I really enjoyed learning about a new music genre - its chord
progressions, lyric structures, and other conventions. It left my brain happily
stretched.

I know how ironic that sounds, considering that Green Day is a multi-platinum
band in a genre that invented the term "sellout." And yes, the idea of a [rock
opera](http://music.ign.com/articles/549/549981p1.html) did rub more than a few
punk purists the wrong way.

None of that really bothers me, though. It's great, great music. I'm just glad
it smacked me upside the head in the first place.

