3520
Geek heroes

<p class="right"><a href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1210166/">
  <img class="shadow" src="/moneyball_geek.jpg" /></a></p>

I've [seen](/movies) some interesting geek heroes in popular media recently. A
lab biologist saves the day in [Contagion](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1598778/)
by formulating a vaccine to stop the massive plague sweeping the planet.
[Moneyball](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1210166/) glamorizes quants and
statistics geeks, a special breed considered brainy and painfully dull even by
other geeks.

<!--more-->
<p/>

By itself, geeks as heroes isn't interesting. Geek chic has been around for a
long time, as demonstrated by consumer technology, startup culture, indie rock,
and TV shows like [Heroes](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heroes_(TV_series)) and
[Big Bang Theory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Big_Bang_Theory). Hell,
[Ashton Kutcher](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashton_Kutcher) is
[an angel investor](http://www.crunchbase.com/person/ashton-kutcher) now, and
not half bad at it
[from what I hear](http://www.crunchbase.com/company/optimizely). (OK, he
doesn't lead, but still.)

No, the interesting part is that these hero geeks were a non-issue. Geek chic so
far has been self-aware, achingly ironic, "hey look these weird people are now
cool!" In contrast, the geeks in these movies triumphed, but the directors
didn't dwell on it. They were socially awkward and didn't wear makeup, but it
wasn't overstated, and it wasn't the point.

On a less mainstream note, I [just finished](/books)
[David Foster Wallace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Foster_Wallace)'s
[Infinite Jest](http://books.google.com/books?id=Nhe2yvx6hP8C), a howlingly
weird, wonderful behemoth of a book. It doesn't portray geeks as heroes, but it
dives into their personalities with a sensitive, thorough, unflinchingly honest
touch you don't see very often. It's not for the faint hearted, but if you like
your social misfits with a bit of modern magical realism, it's worth the time
commitment.

Geeks are heroes, and no one bats an eye. Very interesting. Progress, of a sort!
