Othering

===
cut down and combine?

I used to dislike affirmative action because it seemed unfair. If minority
groups were disadvantaged, surely the best answer was to try to level the
playing field, not to overcompensate and tilt it the other way. I understood the
arguments for righting past wrongs, boosting diversity back up to the expected
baseline, and so on, but they didn't sway me.

I'm still not a huge affirmative action fan, but for a different reason. Based
on similar historical shifts, time should eventually **fix inequality of
opportunity. The part I care more about now is _othering_. If we **agree on the
goal of a tolerant, equal society, affirmative action and similar policies might
help in the short term, but in the process, they emphasize divisions between
people and promote an us vs them perspective, a worldview of conflicting groups
playing a zero sum game.
===

Don't worry, this post isn't about affirmative action, or even politics.
**Fisher v Texas may have inspired the post, but I've been thinking about social
policy, both large and small, and how the ways we try to help disadvantaged
groups and reduce inequality may hurt more than they help.

<!-- more -->
<span />

Just like our sense of fairness, our tendency to form and belong to groups is
hard wired. It started out with families and small tribes back in caveman times,
then gradually expanded to bigger tribes, towns, cities, countries, and
eventually the "global village." We still care about our small groups of family,
friends, and neighborhood groups, but we also identify and empathize with groups
of billions of people in ways we never could before.

(Incidentally, I wonder if this is why social policy and civil rights have
consistently improved over the course of history. I also wonder if it's a
largely overlooked benefit of globalization. **I'm not alone in those ideas, of
course, nor can I claim them as my own, but they're still intriguing.)

Our groups have also transcended the physical. We used to bond only with people
we could see, meet, and talk to. Now, we define groups by ethnicity, gender,
age, profession, and other characteristics independent of time and space. My
grandmother might identify with senior citizens in China she sees on the TV
news, for example, or for grandparents in a book she reads about living through
the Great Depression.

This isn't bad per se. Just like feeling **in control of your life, **feeling
like you're not alone is a powerfully positive thing. However, I worry about one
Nunintended consequence. When you define a group, you identify people who
_aren't_ in it as well as people who are. That us vs them mentality, that
_othering_ of the people outside the group, can be dangerous.

Some examples of this are easy to come by: white power groups, religious
fundamentalists, good old boys' clubs, **NIMBY opposition to local
infrastructure. Some aren't as obvious, though. Affirmative action is hotly
debated, for example, as are political parties and labor unions, but how about
**minority support groups in workplaces? **Labor unions? **Central banks and
other government economic policy, which may encourage thinking in terms of our
economy vs theirs, instead of the global economy as a whole.

When we debate outsourcing and unemployment, for example, we implicitly accept
that an American deserves a given job more than e.g. an Indian or Chinese
citizen. That doesn't seem right.

Likewise, my biggest takeaway from **PyCon's DongleGate controversy this year
was that many of us still see a clear division between two groups in the tech
community: sexist men who objectify women and make them feel unwelcome, and on
the other side, women who persecute men for slipping even a bit from perfect
political correctness.

The answer isn't at all clear to me, especially since many groups clearly do far
more good than bad. I'd never want to tell an AA group or victim's support group
to disband because they may be emptahizing with outsiders any less. Much the
opposite, those groups probably increase empathy across the board.

Still, many groups are debatable. I think it comes down to empathy and how much
we identify with other people. We've never before been able to see and interact
with so many people across the world, from all walks of life. When we can
empathize with them, if we feel like we're in it together, that's a powerful
force for good. Unfortunately, many of our social policies and groups encourage
us to other them, to put them in the "not like us" bucket and consider them our
competition. That way lie dragons.

(By the way, I'm fully aware of how disingenuous this may seem coming from a
rich white man. I've heard it before, and I understand. I can only hope to sit
at the table and join the conversation like everyone else, biases and all.)

