People don't matter

<img class="right" src="people_silhouettes.jpg" />

We like people. No, scratch that; we _love_ people. They're the most important
thing in the world, and definitely the most important part of our lives. We
think they can do anything they put their mind to. We idolize Gandhi and Steve
Jobs, vilify Hitler and Steve Ballmer, and perpetuate the cult of personality
that insists that every single one of us has the potential for limitless good -
or evil! - if we only muster our courage and push as hard as we can to reach for
that golden ring.

I'm not so sure. I see that potential, but I'm not convinced that the primary
catalyst is inside us, whether you call it passion or drive or willpower or
anything else. Instead, the evidence seems to be mounting that environment plays
a much larger role, even more than the most
[nurture](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nature_versus_nurture)-biased, “his
childhood made him do it!” social progressive might think. The traditional
nature vs. nurture debate focuses on developmental psychology and biology, but
I'm thinking about how we live our lives as adults. We trumpet role models and
self improvement and achievement, but I wonder if instead, we should think a bit
more about environments and systems and incentives.

<!-- more -->
<span />

The latest military scandal is a perfect example. Frustrated and hungry for
action, a few infantrymen in Afghanistan
[formed an underground “kill team,”](http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-kill-team-20110327)
methodically scouted for the perfect time and place, murdered three Afghani in
cold blood, and cut off one of the victims' fingers as a trophy. The truly
stunning part was yet to come: the whistleblower, Adam Winfield, protested that
he'd never meant to out his squadmates. He'd hesitated at the moment of truth,
aiming away from the victims and shooting into the air, but when the kill team
was finally brought to light, Winfield's highest moral imperative was to stand
with his brothers in arms, even if it meant standing by while they murdered
innocent civilians.

Winfield is ethically confused, to put it mildly. He won't kill civilians
himself, but he lets his teammates do the same thing, and afterward tries to
help them cover it up, all of which seems unconceivable to us. We can't what
imagine doing what he did, much less what his kill-teammates did. We have no
frame of reference for killing innocent people, protecting someone else who did,
or announcing it with pride to the world afterward.

<a href="http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2732932/">
 <img class="left shadow" src="kill_team_soldier.jpg" /></a>

You may think that's unfair. War is nothing if not extenuating circumstances,
right? But that's my point exactly. So far there's no evidence that any of the
kill team members were led astray by psychological issues. On the contrary,
Winfield's character witnesses were positively glowing. And yet, after the
Army's basic training broke them down, built them back up, turned them into
warriors, and sent them into a confused, demoralizing mashup of
counterinsurgency and nation building, these men snapped. No wonder the
military's suicide rate has spiked so drastically over the last decade. They may
not be bad _people_, but it's hard to imagine a worse _environment_.

History is rife with war crimes and
[Guantanamo](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guantanamo_Bay_detention_camp)-esque
atrocities, but militaries don't have a monopoly. The
[Stanford prison experiment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanford_prison_experiment)
is a vivid, compelling example of how little it can take to turn ordinary people
into monsters. So too, sadly, are at least some of the Columbine style mass
killings that consume press cycles and Congressional hearings these days. Toxic
environments seem to breed tragedy.

Fortunately, there's a flipside. We love to put famous scientists and inventors
on pedestals, but it's now
[widely](http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/05/12/080512fa_fact_gladwell)
[accepted](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1594487715) that many big
ideas over the course of history were
[independently discovered](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_discovery) by
multiple people at around the same time. Nobel prizes and many others are now
routinely awarded to two or three people responsible for the same discovery, or
more. This neatly follows idea of the
[adjacent possible](http://www.theoryofmind.org/pieces/AAAPT.html), coined by
Stuart Kauffman and elegantly expanded
[by Kevin Kelly](http://www.kk.org/books/what-technology-wants.php) and others.

Science and innovation are cumulative, building on themselves over time. If you
visualize ideas in a physical space, each one next to others it's related to,
you can trace a boundary between the ideas we've discovered and the ones we
haven't yet. We can't discover an idea way out on the horizon, since we haven't
discovered its necessary building blocks, but the ideas on the boundary are ripe
for the taking. All of their precedents are inside the boundary, fresh in the
minds and workplaces of big thinkers across the world. We shouldn't be surprised
when a handful of them come up with the same new idea at the same time. We
should _expect_ it.

Along the same lines, [Steven Johnson](http://www.stevenberlinjohnson.com/)
recently
[classified 300 major scientific and technological innovations](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/31/business/31every.html)
along two dimensions, individual vs group and amateur vs professional. The
earliest innovations tended to come from individual amateurs, but as time
marched on, the center of gravity shifted toward teamsand for-profit
entrepreneurs. We romanticize the self-taught genius and the garage inventor,
but in reality, market incentives and the idea mixing bowls of cities and the
Internet are driving today's innovations.

<img class="right shadow" src="mother_theresa_hitler.jpg" /></a>

People are different from each other, of course, and those differences do
matter. In many ways, people are probably
[even more different than we think](2012-05-21_first_agree_on_the_goal). Draw
any bell curve and you'll find a Hitler on one end and a Mother Teresa on the
other. However, we're also much more _alike_ than we think. Behavioral
psychologists like
[Daniel Kahneman](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Kahneman) and
[Dan Ariely](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dan_Ariely) have gained widespread
attention for their research on common cognitive biases. They and their
colleagues show that not only are we not rational actors, common situations tend
to make us all _irrational_ in the same distinct, highly predictable ways.
[Framing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framing_effect_%28psychology%29) is my
favorite example, but it's only one of many. We may have drastically different
tastes and goals, but when it comes to our behavior, we're often more reactive
than proactive, more predictable than individual.

So, what's the conclusion? If we run with this idea that environment and
incentives have more impact than we think, and individual people less, politics
is one obvious place we look. Term limits notwithstanding, we should focus less
on individual politicians and more on policy and systemic reform. Even if we
hate our elected representatives, "throw the bums out" probably isn't the
answer. More bums are lined up behind them, waiting to take their place. The
same goes for candidates we fall in love with. By all means, throw the bums out
and vote in the ones who who walk on water, but don't stop there. That's just
treating the symptom. We need to address the root cause, not just people passing
through.

This may also be a bitter pill to swallow for libertarians, Tea Partiers, and
civil rights advocates to swallow. They love the cure-alls of personal
responsibility and accountability, and I've always been fond of them too, but
I'm a bit more reluctant now. “Nanny state” may be a pejorative for a reason,
but if our environments are really this powerful, there may be a role for
heavy-handed government yet. It definitely wouldn't be the first time I've had
to [flip-flop on my political views](2012-02-21_reconsidering_my_politics).

Politics is just the start. We're infatuated with the promise of humankind in
pretty much every facet of life, and it blinds us to the alternatives. When you
have a problem at work, or school, or with family or friends, how often does the
answer seem to be that someone is in the wrong, and they need to change? Or if
they can't, you kick them to the curb and find someone better? Try this instead:
take a hard look at the _situation_. What structural patterns could be
contributing to that problem? What parts of the environment are encouraging bad
behavior? How could you reform them to encourage better behavior?

The more I think about this, the more I think that
[Thomas Sowell's _unconstrained vision_](http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3047.A_Conflict_Of_Visions)
has it right. Sure, people matter. They're the most important part of life, bar
none. But when you think about solving problems, or strive to make the world a
better place, don't think about people. You'll never do it by separating the
good apples from bad, by forcing or persuading people to be better. Think about
the organizations we work in, the environments we play in, and the ecosystems we
live in. Change those for the better, and the people will change themselves.
