Cruise

<a class="shutter" href="old_cruise_boat_poster_1.jpg">
 <img class="right shadow" src="old_cruise_boat_poster_1_thumb.jpg" /></a>

We've been on a cruise for the past two weeks,
[sailing a lazy loop around the UK](2013-05-24_scotland_and_ireland) before
going to a wedding near London. I'd been on a couple cruises before, but this
was the first time either of us had done one on our own, as adults, for
vacation. We liked some of it, but not all of it, and the contrast between the
good and the bad was fascinating.

If you've never been on a cruise, the clich√© you probably have in mind is spot
on. We sailed (ok, motored) at night and spent days in port, mostly in Scotland
and Ireland. The boat was huge, carrying at least a few thousand passengers and
well over 500 crew. Between sightseeing in port, activities and entertainment on
board, and lots of eating and drinking, there was always plenty to do.

<!-- more -->
<p/>

Even so, we were idle often. Demographics on cruises vary, but the passengers on
ourswere mostly American, and the cold, wet weather meant they skewed older.
Much older. The median age was somewhere around 60. We socialized here and there
and made a few friends, but not many.

We didn't mind, though. We're both pretty introverted,
[energy wise](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2003/03/caring-for-your-introvert/302696/)
at least, so heavy socializing with lots of new people isn't our idea of a
relaxing vacation. Surprisingly, the crew's constant attention turned out to
drain us more than our fellow passengers. For introverts, the feeling of other
people constantly waiting on you and thinking about you can be a bit oppressive.

We're not big joiners, either, so the shows, art auctions, seminars, gambling,
shopping, and other shipboard activities (read: upsells) weren't big draws. We
spent a fair amount of time reading, writing, playing board games, and working
out in the well appointed gym. We clearly didn't take full advantage of the
ship.

We did jump into the excursions on land, though. They were easily the best part
of the trip. We saw an interesting new place almost every day, without worrying
about the logistics of travel. We'd wake up, grab breakfast, walk off the boat
into a guided tour or exploring on our own, and at the end of the day, we came
right back to our familiar room. The most we had to think about was which sights
to see, if we weren't on a tour. We knew all too well
[how tiring](2012-07-07_venice_florence_tuscany) a normal trip could be,
driving and flying and catching trains, packing and unpacking and finding a new
hotel every day or two. The freedom from all that
[decision fatigue](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/21/magazine/do-you-suffer-from-decision-fatigue.html)
was amazingly liberating.

Unfortunately, I don't know if it's entirely possible to decouple the pleasure
of travel from the effort it entails. The cruise handled so much for us, I
wonder if we coasted a bit. We didn't have to worry about details, so we may not
have appreciated the travel itself quite as much. We still found sights and
stories and new friends, but we didn't earn any of the crazy, unforgettable
adventure of fending for ourselves in a truly foreign place.

We've done plenty of that on other trips, and it's great...but it's also
exhausting. If we go somewhere far away, we feel obligated to make the most of
it and see as much as we can. After a week or two of constant moving around,
we're wiped out. If our planning eyes happened to be bigger than our travelling
stomachs, and we have more to go, the fatigue can start to override the joy, and
the trip develops a permanent, bitter aftertaste.

<a class="shutter" href="old_cruise_boat_poster_2.jpg">
 <img class="left shadow" src="old_cruise_boat_poster_2_thumb.jpg" /></a>

Fashionable travel now takes this to the extreme. The goal is to find
out-of-the-way places, avoiding anything resembling modern civilization and
immersing yourself in a pristine, unique foreign culture. That can be great, but
we built modern civilization for a reason. Without it, travel is slow and
painful, communication is difficult at best, and the mosquitoes will give you
malaria. Don't even think about drinking water, any water, unless you packed it
in yourself.

I exaggerate, but only somewhat. I'd love to visit Israel, for example, but I
don't need to work on a [kibbutz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kibbutz) for a
month. When I get to Croatia, I'll cross it off my list even if I don't go
kitesurfing. And Tokyo will still be memorable even though I'll probably never
get a reservation at [Jiro's](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sukiyabashi_Jiro).

I do see the merit in one variant of the hipster travel mentality. We have many
friends who have gone to just one place and lived there for a while. They dive
deep into the rhythms and flavors of the local people and places. They may take
weekend trips, but otherwise don't try to cram in all the sights at once, so
they avoid the relentless travel grind and end up with more energy to explore.

I also appreciate the part of the hipster mentality that values quality,
authenticity, and artisanship, at least in moderation. The cruise excursions did
give us local cuisine, crafts, and culture, but heavily filtered. We got great
haggis in Scotland, for example, but I'd never expect a spicy curry. If you want
to hit the hot bars or clubs, or find the legendary underground creme brulee
cart, you're on your own. Worse, if you can't do it in 8 hours or so, you're out
of luck.

(To his credit, our tour guide in Belfast didn't shy away from telling us real
stories of neighborhoods we saw that were central to
[the Troubles](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Troubles) between the IRA and
England in the 1980s. I'd looked forward to that, so I was pleasantly surprised.)

So, what's the conclusion? Honestly, I'm not sure. We didn't love it, but we
didn't hate it either. Most of the other passengers were regular cruisers, and
the heavily mediated, kindergarten-for-adults thing clearly worked for them. If
you're a hipster traveler, it's obviously not for you...but otherwise, you'll
want to decide for yourself. I doubt we'll take another cruise soon, but we're
not ruling it out!
