Thoughts on having a baby

<p class="right half">
 <a href="">
  <img class="shadow u-featured" src="/.jpg" /></a></p>

1. You expect your world to narrow a bit, while you figure out what the hell
you're doing, but it's still a surprise when it narrows all the way down to
_poop_, and poop exclusively. Smell, color, texture, volume, frequency, how it
arrives, how it departs, what it symbolizes on a cosmic level.  
Friends told you this would happen, and you believed them, but you had no idea.
It's silly. When you start gushing at a dinner party about soft, even grains in
a thick yellow paste, you've gone over the edge. Don't fight it; just embrace
it. (The talking, that is. Not the poop.)

1. We're actually very lucky. Brooke was extremely chill for her first month or
so. She's getting more vocal now, and staying awake at night a bit more, but
still, compared to many babies, she's pretty damn easy. We have no idea which
god smiled on us after all the goats we sacrificed, but we're counting our
blessings.

1. As a corollary, I can't claim to have any real insights here. If you have a
baby of your own, don't ask us for advice. We don't have any. And _definitely_
don't ask us about parenting, we're not even close to doing any of that. She's
not really a person yet, so much as a single-minded eating, sleeping, pooping
machine. Ask us again in 18 years, maybe.

1. Asking your friends with kids for advice is like reading the Bible. There's a
*ton* of it, and lots is actually pretty good, but it's often couched in
language you don't understand, and when you do manage to piece together a few
bits, they all contradict each other.

1. The advice you do hear most often isn't really advice at all, so much as a
doomsday prophecy. "Your life will change forever," they intone vacantly. "What
should I do? How can I get ready?" They laugh, "There is no ready. Forsake all
hope, ye who enter parenthood! Relax, ride the tidal wave, hope you wash up
alive afterward."  
This, of course, is maddening. Not only is it the biggest change in your life,
bar none - in comparative terms, getting married is a joke - but *you can't
prepare for it.* If you're a high functioning person, used to bending the world
to your will, you bang your head against this until you're (figuratively)
bloody. I'd tell you not to, and you'd nod your head and agree, and then you'd
go do it anyway. You can't help yourself. Accept it.

1. Sleep deprivation. This is the other constant advice you hear from
friends...and again, by advice I mean doomsday prophecy. You know how you always
greet new parents with a gentle "Getting any sleep?" It's not just a joke.
_They're not getting any sleep._ At least many of them, if not all. They're up
all night, feeding and rocking and pacifiering and white noising and _not
sleeping. At all. Night after night._

<p class="left half">
 <a href="/brooke_rides_snoopy.jpg">
  <img class="shadow" src="/brooke_rides_snoopy.jpg" /></a></p>

1. The cats have been great. They took a few days to warm up to Brooke, but now
they love her, and they're very gentle. In general, if you worry about pets
attacking your baby or smothering them, don't. That's about as likely as getting
kidnapped from their crib by the
[chupacabra](https://www.google.com/search?q=define%3Achupacabra). Instead,
worry about *actual* dangers: falling into the pool, getting hit by a car, or
developing allergies and
[metabolic syndrome](https://www.google.com/search?q=define%3Ametabolic+syndrome)
(among others) due to oversanitizing.

1. That's all academic, though. You won't have the time or attention span to
worry much anyway; one of the biggest things you lose is _unbroken time_. Love
going for a long run, playing a great [video game](/games) until 2am, or curling
up and reading a trashy book cover to cover? Too bad. Free time now comes in
5-15 minute bursts. The new normal is running upstairs with a laundry basket,
playing Candy Crush on your phone, and reading Facebook posts.  
[Podcasts](/podcasts) and audiobooks are great for this. They keep you
entertained but leave your hands free. Add a bluetooth headset or pair of
headphones and you're golden.

1. That part's manageable, though. The worse part, especially for high
functioning, high powered people like many of us, is the nagging sense of
helplessness. If you're used to doing this, controlling your environment,
_getting things done_, get ready. A baby will smack you upside your head right
quick. The first time they're screaming their head off and you can't calm them
down, no matter how much you feed them or rock them or play white noise or shove
that pacifier in? It's annoying. The tenth time? The hundredth? It's
incredibly demoralizing.  
Take a step back, maybe even leave the baby and close the door for a minute to
catch your breath, then count your blessings. Your kid may be pissed, but she's
also healthy, vibrant, and _damn_ but she has a pair of lungs on her. She could
be the next Lady Gaga! She may be crying a blue streak, but she'll be fine. I
promise. Zen out and roll with it.

1. If you came here looking for concrete tips, I hope you stopped reading a
while back That's a big industry I'm not about to try to compete in. However, I
will happily shill for one product:
[Dr. Brown's](http://www.drbrownsbaby.com/healthy-wipes/pacifier-bottle-wipes)
bottles and pacifiers. They're great.  
I don't know what it is about babies and burping and farting, but they have a
love/hate relationship. You'll think about them a *lot*, second only to poop.
There are tons of techniques and positions to avoid swallowing air, but in the
end, Dr. Brown's bottles were the biggest winner for us. Brooke stopped fighting
and actually relaxed while she ate.
[Winner winner bottle dinner!](http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=winner%20winner%20chicken%20dinner)
