Why Gimlet's podcast ads work

<p class="third right">
 <img src="/podcast.jpg" /></p>

I listen to [a lot of podcasts](/podcasts). I love them. At times, I've
[loved them a little _too_ much](/2012-01-16_coffee_breaks_for_the_brain).
However, one part I don't love is the ads. I usually fast forward through them.
I often feel a bit guilty, since I know ads are how they survive, but I still do
it.

So when I realized yesterday that I actually listen to and enjoy ads on a couple
podcasts - [Reply All](http://gimletmedia.com/show/reply-all/) and
[StartUp](http://gimletmedia.com/show/startup/), the first two shows from
nascent studio [Gimlet Media](http://gimletmedia.com/) - it seemed notable. It's
not hard to figure out why: their ads are actually interesting. The show's
producers themselves also produce, and they take the same approach: talk to real
people, find an interesting story, tell it well.

<!-- more -->
<span />

My favorite recent example is
[one of StartUp's](http://gimletmedia.com/episode/origin-story-season-2-1-2-3-4/)
ads for [Ford](https://social.ford.com/content/campaign/ebpodcasts/). Producer
[Lisa Chow](https://twitter.com/lisaechow) talked to Ford designers to discover
a powerful (and hilarious) way they introduce empathy into their design process:
the "old suit." This body suit adds weight and bulk, stiffens joints, and gnarls
their posture until they feel 40 years older. Normal doors, consoles, and other
interior elements suddenly become unusable when designers wear the old suit.
They find these problem spots, fix them, and make better cars.

Making ads interesting is nothing new. Ad agencies have done it for years.
Podcasts may not have gotten the message quite yet, but they should. Gimlet did,
and it works for them.
