865
Subspace

_[STS145](http://sts145.stanford.edu/) Game Review,
[part](http://shl.stanford.edu/Game_archive/StudentPapers/BySubject/S-T/Sn-Sz/Subspace/Barrett_Ryan.pdf)
of the
[How They Got Game archive](http://shl.stanford.edu/Game_archive/)_

If you happened to catch a friend playing Subspace on his or her
lunch break, you might dismiss it without a second thought. I know
I did. A blurb about Subspace in a magazine caught my eye, so I
went to the game's web page to check it out. "Weak," I thought to
myself. "It looks like Asteroids." Of course, Asteroids was beloved
when it was released in 1979, but after 22 years or industry
progress, games are expected to be somewhat deeper and more
immersive. A few weeks later, at the urging of a friend, I
downloaded the beta and tried it out. When I looked up, it was 3:OO
in the morning. I was convinced, and so were reviewers and fans
alike. Subspace garnered praise for its perfectly balanced gameplay
and the developers' willingness to take technology risks too
bleeding-edge for many others to attempt. Kevin Rice of DailyRadar
says "So what's the big deal? Why are people still playing a
technologically and graphically outdated game? In a word, gameplay.
This game is the epitome of substance over style."' [[1]](#1) The
highest praise, however, is the thousands of people who still play
it to this day.

**Identification**

Subspace was developed by Virgin Interactive Entertainment and
published in 1997. Virgin hired producer Rod Humble from Kesmai
after his success on the boxed version of the action-oriented
flight simulator Air Warrior. "They asked him what kind of game he
wanted to make. \[He told them\] and they said, 'Sure, go ahead and
here's the money. True story.'" [[2]](#2) Rod brought on board Jeff
Petersen, a talented programmer he had worked with at Kesmai, and
within a month they had a rough prototype up and running. As
development cycles in the game industry go, Subspace's was somewhat
unusual. The development team was small and unproven as a group,
and Subspace wasn't a flagship title, so "JeffP" and "Rodvik"
decided to release the game to a public alpha and beta test. This
meant that anyone with an Internet connection could download the
work in progress, try it out, and send their comments straight to
the developers. For a newly created, fledgling team, this was
definitely a winning strategy.

There aren't very many clear accounts of what happened shortly
after, but one thing couldn't be disputed. VIE disintegrated in a
puff of smoke. Some of VIE'S assets - including the Westwood
development studio, known best for the Command and Conquer series -
were bought by Electronic Arts, some of them were folded back into
Virgin, Inc., some were divested to Interplay (which now uses the
VIE name as a brand name), and some of them simply vanished.
Subspace was one of the assets that vanished. While it did exist,
though, VIE created some landmark games and a lot of lasting
memories.

**Gameplay**

As is the case with many games, Subspace's back story is
inconsequential. This is due in no small part to its gameplay.
Subspace is an unabashed Asteroids knockoff - at its core, it
consists of spaceships that fly around and shoot at other
spaceships. The view is top-down, the environment is a
two-dimensional plane, and the concept is exceedingly simple. The
one catch is that the movement model is true to Asteroids as well;
the controls allow the pilot to thrust and affect the ship's
momentum, following Newton's laws of physics. The environment
consists of walls forming wide open spaces, tight corridors, mazes,
asteroid fields, and doors. There are two main weapons, guns and
proximity bombs. The one-size-fits-all powerup is the "green,"
which appears as a pulsing green blob and upgrades any one of the
ship's subsystems (engine, shields, guns, bombs, etc.). There are
also various special items such as stealth, repel, burst, and
x-radar. The one innovative gameplay feature is that the ship's
health, or energy, is also used as the ammo supply. Each bomb and
bullet takes a certain amount of energy to shoot, and the ship's
energy level is constantly but slowly recharging. This adds
significantly to the depth of the gameplay.

This concept may be historically proven, but in 1997 it would have
seemed tired and cliched. However, there is a piece missing.
Subspace is an Internet-only game. The official term is "massively
multiplayer," but the reality is much more immediate and powerful:
the pilot doesn't play against a faceless computer opponent but
against real people, thousands of them at once, from all over the
world, at any time of day. Each pilot has a name and password,
which they use to log onto a server. There are many different
kinds of zones, both individual and team-based, including Alpha
(beginner), Chaos (every man for himself), Capture the Flag,
Warzone (team fighting), Control (a strategic team-based game),
Hockey, and others. The servers run 24 hours a day and remember
each pilot's score and statistics. The display has a map of the
pilot's immediate surroundings as well as an integrated chat
window so that pilots can talk to other players, their team, or
everyone in the zone. Notifications of events in the game are also
displayed here. Subspace was one of the first games to allow
hundreds or even thousands of people to play in a multiplayer game
at once, and its multiplayer design was a tremendous success.

**Technology**

Subspace uses a fast, flexible graphics engine, capable of drawing
dozens of ships and hundreds of projectiles on screen while
maintaining a high framerate. The resolution, user interface, and
controls can all be customized. The game CD shipped with a level
editor and server executable so that users could run their own
servers. The game rules can be defined by the user, so eventually
user-run servers appeared with everything from Subspace tournaments
to recreations of Star Wars battles.

However, the multiplayer code is by far the most important
technology in the game. Subspace uses a distributed client/server
architecture that coordinates the actions of thousands of networked
pilots at once. The architecture is client-based, which means that
each client makes decisions about what happens in the game based on
its pilot's actions. The clients send these decisions to the
server, which forwards them to any other clients in the area. The
network code also uses client prediction and movement filtering to
deal with latency, since the Internet is an unpredictable,
best-effort-only network. These measures make most reasonable
amounts of latency and packet loss almost unnoticeable. This was
absolutely essential to the implementation of Subspace's design,
because in an action game, even a hundredth of a second can mean
the difference between life and death.

**Design**

Subspace's game design is ingenuous. It is easy to learn but
impossible to master, the hallmark of historically successful game
designs like checkers, chess, and bridge. The fundamental game
design is simple but deep, which allows pilots to develop detailed
tactics and strategies. Bullets and bombs inherit both the ship's
momentum and momentum in the direction fired, which can be used to
a smart pilot's advantage. Ships bounce off walls with 80% of their
initial speed, which is often used in intricate flight patterns.
Also, the simplicity of gameplay combined with the momentum-based
model mean that the skills of flying and fighting can be developed
and improved without bound. This is essential for the depth of
Subspace's gameplay - if a skill can be mastered quickly, it ceases
to challenge the player or provide them incentive to keep playing.

Subspace's game design is also successful because it is massively
multiplayer. Human beings are more unpredictable, more challenging,
and simply more fun to play video games against than computer AI.
In Subspace, there are always plenty of human pilots at any skill
level to play against. Moreover, human pilots can learn from past
battles and improve their skills - a human player would learn to
counter a tactic that might beat a computer AI over and over again.
Also, Subspace gives pilots opportunities to show their own
personality and style through the game. Pilots can choose one of
seven different types of ships, each with unique characteristics,
strengths, and weaknesses. Every pilot's name is displayed next to
their ship in the game, and pilots can also draw a small "banner" -
a 12 by 16 pixel picture - to be displayed as well. Each zone
focuses on a different style of play and emphasizes different
strengths that might draw people to play it. Finally, since the
gameplay allows for intricate tactics and strategies, pilots often
develop distinct styles of flying and fighting and unique maneuvers
that are identified with them. These features that draw people into
Subspace exist only in massively multiplayer games.

**Role in History**

Subspace was one of the first truly successful massively
multiplayer games in the commercial sphere. Reviews unanimously
praised its gameplay and network technology. Reviewers also often
commented on the little touches that added polish, such as the
notifications of game events, integrated pilot list and chat
window, different game types, and customizable server program and
level editor shipped with the game. The development of Subspace
also succeeded in doing many things rarely (if ever) attempted in
commercial game development. A small development team, an
Internet-only game, a long public alpha/beta test, graphics that
did not push the envelope, all of these were factors that most
other development teams would have shied away from. Subspace broke
ground in the massively multiplayer field and paved the way for
many online real-time games, including Everquest, Asheron's Call,
and Quake 3 Arena. It may have performed only modestly on the
shelves, but Subspace accomplished big things in the game
industry.

After the explosive demise of VIE, most of the Subspace development
team struck out on their own and formed a development company
called Harmless Games and a publishing contract with Sony. Building
on their experience with Subspace, Harmless is putting the
finishing touches on an online, squad-based multiplayer game called
Infantry. As for Subspace, the community of loyal pilots is still
alive and kicking. The number of people playing at any given time
may only be 50-100, around 10% of the numbers at its peak. However,
the people are as committed as ever. There is even a Subspace
Council, a group informally dedicated to supporting the community
in VIE'S absence, and updating the game software when needed. So go
to [sscouncil.net](http://www.sscouncil.net/) and give it a try,
and don't let the resemblance to Asteroids stop you. Subspace was
one of the first commercial massively multiplayer games. It has
deep and involving gameplay, an active user community,
sophisticated network technology, and strong opportunities for
personalization. And despite all that, it's easy to learn and fun
to play.

<a name="1"></a> [1] Kevin Rice,
[*Subspace: The Best Game You're Not Playing,*](http://www.dailyradar.com/features/game_featurepage_8901.html)
feature for (now defunct) [DailyRadar.com](http://DailyRadar.com).

<a name="2"></a> [2] Jeff Sengstack,
[Subspace review for GameSpot PC](http://www.gamespot.com/pc/action/subspace/review.html).
