Symphony

I went to the [SF symphony](http://sfsymphony.com/) on friday, and it was great.
The headliner was Stravinsky's [Symphony in Three
Movements](http://www.sfsymphony.org/audioplayer/jukeset1.asp?clipid=132), which
is classic Stravinsky. It's big and sweeping and rough around the edges, and
it's a lot of fun.

They also played a Weill violin concerto, which I was meh about, and a piece
called "Different Trains" by [Steve
Reich](http://www.sfsymphony.org/audioplayer/jukeset1.asp?clipid=132), which was
only written 15 years ago. It was _really_ interesting. The three movements were
"America: Before the war", "Europe: During the war", and "After the war". He
took little clips of people talking about their experiences during the war and
played them with the piece, kind of like another instrument. He brought out the
tonal changes in their voices by writing other instruments to play in tune with
their voices. Also, he cut and spliced their phrases together, quickly and out
of order, almost like a DJ was spinning. It was very very cool.

I also went [last
week](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/event_info.asp?nodeid=250&callid=93&eventid=636),
and they played a Chopin piano concerto (yeah, I'm predictable :P), an ok
Scriabin piece, and an amazing piece, [Exquisite
Corpse](http://www.hillborg.com/works.aspx?PageID=2&CompID=53) by a modern
composer named [Anders
Hillborg](http://www.hillborg.com/works.aspx?PageID=2&CompID=53). It was the US
premiere, so he was there at the performance. Somehow, he wrote for the
instruments to make sounds I'd never heard them make before. Parts of it sounded
almost like ambient noise - ocean waves, a beehive, wind through the trees.
There were definitely notes and melodies and harmonies too, but even then, they
sounded very different. Almost eerie. Sometimes when the brass played, it
sounded like motion blur looks. Resonant, but very tight. At other times, notes
would grow and shrink, but you'd never hear them actually start or stop. It was
incredible. What's worse, there's no recording of it. Nothing like zero supply
to increase demand...my demand, at least!
