2003-12-31

### Non-gamers, stop reading now

At the risk of reinforcing the fact that I'm a geek, I got to play a few
Playstation 2 games over christmas vacation, and they were pretty damn
good.![/space/amplitude.jpg](/space/amplitude.jpg)

[Amplitude](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/589401.asp) is a music-based game,
similar to [Dance Dance
Revolution](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/914995.asp), and it's very good.
It's pretty easy to learn, you can play with lots of people at once, and it's
_lots_ of fun. More importantly, though, this is the first music game I've
played that has really made me feel like I'm actually making music, at least to
some degree. That's impressive.

Other games to check out in that genre are
[Frequency](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/516506.asp) (which Amplitude is
the sequel to), [Rez](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/517868.asp) (which is
weird enough that it could be a safe, non-toxic substitute for ecstasy), the
critically acclaimed [Samba de
Amigo](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/198539.asp), and of course, the
venerable Dance Dance Revolution.

In between games of Frequency, we pretended we were Kobe (um, make that Latrell)
in [NBA Live 2004](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/914787.asp) from EA
Sports, hit the slopes in [SSX 3](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/914646.asp)
from EA Sports _Big_ (no, I don't know the difference either), battled Nazis -
and incompetent teammates - in [Medal of
Honor](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/471207.asp), and, um, pretended we
were furry little cartoon characters in [Jak
2](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/914535.asp). All solid games, and if you
got a PS2 for Christmas, you can't go wrong with any of them.

In other game-related news, my sister got me [Prince of
Persia](http://gamerankings.com/htmlpages2/589721.asp) for Christmas, which is
supposedly one of the best PC games of the year. I can't wait to play it! That
is, as soon as she stops playing it herself so I can install it. :P

