2004-02-22

### Go Gravedigger!
![/space/crash.jpg](/space/crash.jpg)![/space/monsterjam.jpg](/space/monsterjam.jpg)![/space/crushcars.jpg](/space/crushcars.jpg)

Update: [Photo album](/gallery/Monster+Truck+Rally) is up.

Sunday, _Sunday_, **SUNDAY!!!** Um, I mean, Saturday, I went to a [monster truck
rally!](http://www.ushra.com/results/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8770605) It was
at Pacbell Park, of all places, only a couple blocks from my apartment. We had a
huge group of people, lots of Googlers and non-Googlers, and it was a blast. As
our host said:

Your first reaction is probably: "Hey Chris, I don't just go to any monster
truck jam these days. They are a dime a dozen. So exactly which trucks will be
there? I don't want to waste my time looking at washed up, old school, Bigfoot."

Glad you asked. Well placed sources at the [United States Hot Rod
Association](http://www.ushra.com) tell me that the featured trucks will
include:

  * [Grave
Digger](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8770037)
driven by Dennis Anderson
  * [Blue
Thunder](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8764961)
driven by Tony Farrell
  * [Power
Forward](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8765000) and
[Maximum
Destruction](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8768425)
driven by Tom Meents
  * [High
Roller](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8764980)
driven by Phil Foster
  * [Madusa](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8764991),
[El Toro](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8764974),
and
[Obsession](http://www.ushra.com/driverbios/x.php?mode=view&tile=1&id=8764997)
all driven by Rick Swanson



[Jesus - The Monster Truck](http://www.gluck.net/jesus/) will be unable to
appear.![/space/eltoro.jpg](/space/eltoro.jpg)![/space/wheelies.jpg](/space/wheelies.jpg)![/space/gravedigger.jpg](/space/gravedigger.jpg)![/space/tipped.jpg](/space/tipped.jpg)

We actually ended up sitting next to the girlfriend and brother of Dennis
Anderson, the Grave Digger driver. (Grave Digger is currently the top dog of
monster trucks.) They gave us lots of inside info about the trucks. These things
put out 1200-1400hp at 700lbs. of torque. They have monstrous shocks,
suspension, and struts just to withstand the pressure. The drivers sit in the
middle of the front bench, to protect them if their trucks roll. The tires alone
are around six to eight feet tall! Both front and back axles have differentials,
steering, and _independent throttles_ - the driver can control the throttle to
each wheel independently! Ridiculous.

So, my day on Saturday consisted of the gym, CodeCon (a programming conference),
a monster truck rally, and clubbing. Quite a day. :P

