2004-09-20

### Sharing Digital Pictures 





Since I dont post here often...I figure I'd make this one really, really long to
make up for lost time.

I finally got tired of making webalbums in somebody else's paradigm. Not that
they weren't great programs, but I'm stubborn and didn't want to change my own
workflow. This is how I work with pictures:

  * Download pictures from camera into directories based on the date that the
picture was taken

  * Select the pictures I want, copy them to a directory made public by my
webserver

  * Write captions

  * Link all the pictures together with quasi-fancy html

To do this I had to select the pictures with the normal folder system of
windows, which isn't bad and then use some other program to write captions and
generate html.

In the beginning, there was [Album Express](http://fookes.com/album). It was
nice, but the albums didn't use CSS and it cost $25.

Then came the age of SnipSnap. We wrote our [own
macro](/space/Snipsnap+macros) to fit into the SnipSnap
paradigm. This was nice, but it didn't have captions, alas we could not describe
our photos to our friends.

I turned my eyes to [JAlbum](http://jalbum.net) next. It was very nice, you
could add captions and make very pretty albums with lots of data. Very
professional. However, you still had to pick your pictures using Windows
explorer and copy them over yourself. Once you had done that, you couldn't nix a
picture you changed your mind about sharing.

Then I found [Picasa](http://www.picasa.com/), which is really, really pretty.
It easily lets you create albums while keeping your precious archive intact.
However, there are no captions! They do keywords and all, but no friggin
captions! Another sad thing is that you can't parse the albums that Picasa
generates. Which means that you're stuck using their album formats.

The last such program that I found before I wrote my own, was [Web Album
Generator](http://www.ornj.net/software/webalbum/). It generated very simple,
but elegant albums using CSS, but like JAlbum, once you selected a directory,
you had to use all the pictures in there.

So finally, I got off my duff and wrote my own album generating software!

**Introducing: **
[MAlbum](http://maulik.freeshell.net/software/malbum-release/): **Maulik's Album
app**

[![thumb_screenshot.jpg](http://maulik.freeshell.net/software/malbum-release/thumb_screenshot.jpg)](http://maulik.freeshell.net/software/malbum-release/)

(there's also a [mirror](/space/MAlbum) here on Snarfed)

And folks, _all seriousness aside_, let me tell you, it slices and it dices,
it's the greatest thing to happen to digital picture taking since the digital
camera itself :-P LOL

Here's what it **does** do:

I understands that maybe a data packrat, and would never want to throw away a
single picture you've taken. So, you add a folder from your archive, maybe two
(one pre-midnight, one post midnight).

You start tabbing through the pictures and you see a picture that deserves a
caption. Type it in and keep on tabbing. See one you don't want the world to
see, hit ctrl-del, it's outta the family (but still in your archive). When
you're done, you pick the directory where the album should live, say in the one
that your webserver makes public, and hit "make the album". And now your time
with MAlbum is done.

Think me a geek? You're right my friend ... you're so right :-P

    * Maulik

