2005-06-20

### Season ten wraps up

<div class="img-shadow" style="float: right; margin-left: 10px">
  <a href="http://sfsymphony.org/"><img src="/space/timpani_symphony.jpg" /></a>
</div>

I heard the [SF Symphony](http://sfsymphony.org/) last Friday, and as usual, it
was spectacular. It was the last performance I'll hear this season, so it was
also a little bittersweet. I have to remind myself that anticipation can be a
good thing. I can't wait for next season!

The program only consisted of two pieces, but they were both blockbusters. The
first was the world premiere of [XII/The Grand
Encounter](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/pgmnote.asp?nodeid=3516&callid=117),
a timpani concerto (!) commissioned for
[MTT](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/mttover.asp?nodeid=59)'s birthday. It
was written by by William Kraft, one of the instrument's true authorities. He
was the [LA Philharmonic](http://laphil.org)'s principal timpanist for decades,
and his resume boasts a list of performance chairs, fellowships, and commissions
longer than my arm. Even so, I was skeptical that a timpani could hold the
spotlight for an entire concerto.

Kraft convinced me. He used a massive percussion section, sliding tones from the
strings, and a timpani rack custom-built for the piece. The piece itself was an
emphatically modern soundscape. What it lacked in melody, it more than made up
for in tonality and ambience. The timpani solo part and the orchestra blended
very organically. The end result was striking, unsettling, and achingly
beautiful. I can't wait to get my hands on a recording.

The headliner was [Beethoven's
Ninth](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/pgmnote.asp?nodeid=3517&callid=117),
which never fails to bring down the house. For me, Beethoven is one of a handful
of composers who truly define the Romantic period. The first movent of the Ninth
is stirring, and seminal, but you'll barely remember it after the adrenaline
from the second movement hits your veins. It must be a blast to play that part
with a world-class orchestra. Even better, the SFS Chorus is over 150 voices
strong, so the last movement resonates in person with a richness that can only
be experienced in person.

For my money, though, the third movement's _andante_ was by far the most
compelling part. During the variations, the counterpart between the violin and
cello seemed effortless, almost lighter than air. The audience was spellbound
long after the final notes faded away. They definitely took my breath away.

Even so, this season didn't quite measure up to last season. First, I lost my
regular symphony date, whom I miss horribly. The symphony, like everything else
in life, isn't the same with anyone else. Second, since I [moved down to the
peninsula](/space/2004-12-02), I got a package at
[Flint Center](http://www.flintcenter.com/) instead of
[Davies](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/hall_over.asp?nodeid=96). It's
functional, and the commute is easier, but it just doesn't do the music justice.
Davies is a world-class venue, and I miss it. I'll definitely have to head back
to San Francisco next year!

