2005-12-11

### Stravinsky's Nightingale and Oedipus Rex 



[![/space/stravinsky_oedipus_rex.jpg](/space/stravinsky_oedipus_rex.jpg)](http://www.andante.com/images/Articles/KirovOedipusB180x190.jpg)[![/space/stravinsky_the_nightingale_set.jpg](/space/stravinsky_the_nightingale_set.jpg)](http://www.sfsymphony.org/images/press_lg/setNightingale.jpg)[![/space/stravinsky_the_nightingale.jpg](/space/stravinsky_the_nightingale.jpg)](http://www.juilliard.edu/images/content/music_rossignol.jpg)


Last night, I headed up to the city for one of the more unusual symphony
performances [this
season](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/series_info.asp?nodeid=248&callid=95&seasonid=7&L3Hilite=1&seriesid=306),
[Stravinsky's Oedipus Rex and The
Nightingale](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/event_info.asp?nodeid=250&callid=93&eventid=931  ). The SFS occasionally performs arias, but this was the first time I'd ever
seen them actually stage operas whole, with operatic singers, classical ballet,
and even subtitles projected above the stage. I've gone to see classical music
live for as long as I can remember, but before this, I'd never seen an opera.
Now I've seen two, and I have to admit, they were fun.

They were also very different. The music may not entirely take a back seat to
the story, but it definitely plays second fiddle to the singers. It's a whole
different world from the concertos and sonatas and symphonies I know and love.
To truly appreciate it, I'd need to learn a lot more about opera. At three or
four hours per, though, plus damage to my eardrums (kidding), I'm not terribly
inclined to get opera season tickets.

Still, this was a great introduction. The sets were gorgeous, the music was
eerily striking - classic Stravinsky - and the performers were incredible.
Granted, _Oedipus Rex_ wasn't quite as tight as it could have been - most of the
story was told by a narrator which broke the flow - , but _The Nightingale_ was
absolutely gorgeous. Plus, at around an hour each, they were perfect for my
attention span. :P

All in all, it was a great night. I admit, I'm looking forward to getting back
to basics with the next performance, a [Beethoven piano
concerto](http://www.sfsymphony.org/templates/router.asp?nodeid=250&eventid=932&callid=248&seriesid=306).
Still, I was pleasantly surprised by the detour into opera.

(Oh, and we afterpartied at
['Tis](http://www.mytwofrontteeth.org/tis_invite.html), the [My Two Front
Teeth](http://mytwofrontteeth.org/) party at [Mr.
Smith's](http://www.maximumproductions.com/). Josh, Mike, Susie et al. always
throw great parties. Thanks guys!)

