Gliding

[![/space/choir.jpg](/space/choir.jpg)](http://glide.org/)
[![/space/glide_methodist_memorial_church.jpg](/space/glide_methodist_memorial_church.jpg)](http://glide.org/)
[![/space/cecil_williams_preaching.jpg](/space/cecil_williams_preaching.jpg)](http://glide.org/)

Last Sunday, my family and I went to the 11:00 service, or "celebration," at
[Glide Memorial United Methodist Church](http://glide.org/). Glide has been an
institution in San Francisco [since
1931](http://glide.org/ourstories/timeline.asp). It prides itself on being a
church without walls, and it's a fitting description. It's extremely open and
diverse, and does tremendous work in and for the community around it. Don't be
fooled, though, it's a Methodist church in name only. The details of worship and
the bible are largely downplayed in favor of heartwarming stories of people
overcoming struggle, banners with slogans like "Everyone is welcome, everyone is
Glide"...and the music.

Ah, the [music](http://glide.org/celebrate/ensemble.asp). It's the main event at
Glide, easily as important as the sermon, and the choir rocked. Surprisingly,
for a gospel choir, it was very ethnically diverse. The majority of the singers
were white, as were two of the soloists, but they all brought the house down.
People sang and shouted and clapped, waved their hands in rapture, and used up
boxes and boxes of tissue.

Reverend Douglass Fitch delivered the sermon. His "forgiveness is divine"
message was straightforward and simple. Even the few unforgiving potshots at
Bush and Pat Robertson were standard, and you could tell his heart wasn't in it.
We were there for the delivery, though, not the message, and Fitch delivered in
fine gospel style. _Amen! Preach on, brother!_

The tourists and sightseers far outnumbered the regulars in the congregation,
which reminded me of [Palo Alto's recent anarchist
marches](/space/2005-06-27_anarchists_just_aint_what_they_used_to_be). The ushers deftly and
cheerfully handled newcomers, language barriers, and breaches of what little
etiquette was followed.

Surprisingly, the church's architecture itself was underwhelming. The experience
felt much more hippie than gospel, which was a surprise too. I expected
pinstripe suits on the men and fancy hats on the ladies, and there were some,
but they were far outnumbered by beards, birkenstocks, and generally bohemian
attire. Even so, the trip was well worth it.

Next stop, [Grace Cathedral](http://www.gracecathedral.org/)!

