Niles Canyon Christmas Train

<div class="img-shadow">
  <a href="http://www.ncry.org/tol.htm"><img src="/space/niles_canyon_train_of_lights.jpg" /></a>
</div>

Like most people, I spent Thanksgiving at home, taking a break from the usual
overdose of work, projects, and social life. Instead, I overdosed on family,
friends, food, and, er, football. We even found time to put up our Christmas
tree, as well as digging holes in our front yard and attacking rogue cars with
spray paint and
[Bondo](http://www.bondo-online.com/catalog_item.asp?itemNbr=731). Don't ask. :P

However, for me, one of the most memorable moments happened far from home,
family, and friends.

A long time ago, I spent a summer working long hours and late nights at as a
lowly game tester at [EA](http://ea.com/). (Yes, it was fun.) I lived at home,
so I slowly nailed down [the perfect driving
route](http://mapblast.com/directions.aspx?&StartName=94301&StartLocation=37.44467%2c-122.15422&EndName=94566&EndLocation=37.64940%2c-121.85034&DataSetLangID=USA&RouteType=Shortest&RouteUnit=Miles)
between Pleasanton and the peninsula.

The route takes me through [Niles Canyon](http://www.niles.org/), six miles of
curvy, unlit, two-lane driving bliss that parallels [Alameda
Creek](http://www.acwd.org/acwd-alamedacreek.html) and the [Niles Canyon
Railway](http://www.ncry.org/).

This year, on my way back, I hit the canyon at dusk. It was peaceful and dark,
and the road was deserted. As I rounded a bend, a blaze of colored light
appeared out of nowhere. I watched through the pine trees in awe as the light
came into focus. A train, covered in strings of Christmas lights, floated
silently through the canyon. It was unsettling, it was eerily beautiful, and it
gave me goosebumps.

I learned later that it was the Niles Canyon [Train of
Lights](http://www.ncry.org/tol.htm), which rolls every Christmas. I'm sold;
I'll definitely have to get tickets next year. Still, sitting inside the train
can't possibly match the experience of seeing it from the road, larger than
life, glowing through the trees.

[Polar Express](http://polarexpressmovie.warnerbros.com/), eat your heart out!

