Learning to drive

[![/space/g35s_roof_thumb.jpg](/space/g35s_roof_thumb.jpg)](/space/g35s_roof.jpg)
[![/space/skyline_drive_thumb.jpg](/space/skyline_drive_thumb.jpg)](/space/skyline_drive.jpg)
[![/space/lunch_thumb.jpg](/space/lunch_thumb.jpg)](/space/lunch.jpg)

I took my first driving lesson yesterday morning.

OK, it wasn't really a lesson, per se. And I do know how to stay-in-my lane,
stop-at-stop-signs, yield-to-oncoming-traffic drive. But I don't know how to
_drive_.

Of course, my [new car](/space/Ford_Mustang_-_1965_vs._2006) wants to _drive_
with every fiber of its fiberglass body. Luckily, [Giri](http://absolutgcs.org/)
and I have been talking about going driving ever since he got [his
car](http://www.absolutgcs.org/archives/2005/11/in_17_long_hour.html). When he
graciously invited me on a
[drive](http://g35driver.com/forums/showthread.php?t=88754) with his [G35
club](http://www.norcalg.com/), San Francisco to Santa Cruz, I jumped for my
keys.

I met up with the group at [Alice's Restaurant](http://alicesrestaurant.com/) in
Woodside. There were 23 [Infiniti G35](http://www.infiniti.com/G35Coupe)s, two
[Nissan 350Z](http://z.com/)s, and [my Mustang GT](/space/Ford_Mustang_-_1965_vs._2006). Many of the people had only talked on the
[forum](http://g35driver.com/), not in real life, so we did a round of
introductions and talked about our cars and mods. They also gave me a crash
course in driving, which came in handy.

I was the token novice, so when we headed out, I took the rear. We immediately
got stuck behind a pickup truck going 30. He didn't pull over, so the group
slowly passed him one at a time. I waited a few miles for my opening, so the
group was far ahead of me when I passed him.

It turned out to be a blessing in disguise, since it left me entirely alone for
the next 25 miles. Apart from a couple bicycles and the odd northbound car, it
was steep, curvy, two-lane bliss.

More importantly, it was a perfect learning experience. I was free to push my
car, and myself, without worrying about other drivers. Along the way, I felt
things I'd only heard about before: oversteer, understeer, body roll, sway. I
doubt I improved much, but I learned a ton, and I had a great time.

Props to Giri, Andy, Shane, and the rest of the G35s for letting a scruffy
Mustang hang. Thank you! Now when you and [Dan](http://kodiak.brainymonkey.com/)
and other friends talk cars, I might even be able to contribute. :P

