Venice, Florence, and Tuscany

For the second leg of our
[Mediterranean vacation](http://snarfed.org/2012-06-18_vacation), we started in
Venice, took a train to Florence, and drove through the hills and valleys of
Tuscany. Here are a few pictures and thoughts.

<!--more-->
<span />

  * [Venice](#Venice)
  * [Florence](#Florence)
  * [Tuscany](#Tuscany)
  * [Monteriggioni](#Monteriggioni)
  * [Siena](#Siena)
  * [San Gimignano](#San_Gimignano)
  * [San Galgano](#San_Galgano)
  * [Montepulciano](#Montepulciano)

### Venice {#Venice}

Venice's entire raison d'etre is tourists, which makes it feel a bit odd. It
exports a bit of glass, lace, and shipbuilding, but otherwise its economy is
dominated by tourism. It's still a real city, though, not a centrally planned
resort or theme park, which makes for a strange combination of "living museum,"
self-conscious voyeurism, and awkward city government serving a constituency of
foreigners constantly just passing through.

The tourists themselves comprised the groups you'd expect: Italians, Americans,
Brits, Japanese, and Koreans, with people from everywhere else filling in the
gaps.

It's striking how few people actually live on the island proper. We walked the
streets at night and saw building after building with dozens of windows but only
a handful lit up. Apart from the occasional lost tourist, even the residential
areas are deserted. We heard the buildings are expensive to maintain; among
other things, there's strong demand for local businesses that regularly shovel
silt out of the ground floors. Wow.

Venice's overall population has
[dropped by 50%](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venice#Demographics) between 1980
and 2009, to just 60,000, and I'm sure that trend has continued. One bartender
told us that most people commute from outside the city. The big picture in Italy
isn't much better; the birth rate is [only 1.8 now](), far enough below the
[replacement rate of 2.3]() that the government offers
[free housing if you immigrate and work](). Add that to an already shaky economy
and banking system, and the future looks grim.

The Grand Canal is fascinating. By normal waterway rules it's unrecognizable,
but if you think of it like any other large city street, it starts to make
sense. There are taxis, cars, pickup trucks, bicycles (gondolas) for hire, and
buses (the [Vaporetto](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vaporetto)). Only the
pedestrians are confined to the sidewalks.

Beyond the well-known architecture and art, I was surprised and delighted by the
[masquerade masks for Carnival](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnival_of_Venice).
Venetian mask designers are world renowned, and it shows.

[nggallery id=166]

### Florence {#Florence}

Florence felt more like the average western European city. Narrow streets,
cobblestones, historic brick and stone buildings, and sprawling new developments
outside the cramped inner city. We saw this pattern repeated in many other towns
we visited, including [Siena](#Siena), [San Gimignano](#San_Gimignano), and
[Montepulciano](#Montepulciano).

Florence also gave us our first memorable Italian food: white beans and fried
veal brains (!) at [Trattoria Camillo]() and great sauces at the otherwise
unassuming [O Sole Mio](). Sadly, like Venice, Florence failed me in my quest
for an [affogato](). It may be an Italian word, but that didn't make it easy to
find.

Americans continued to dominate the tourist demographics. I'm not sure if
Europeans were sparse due to the relatively worse economy, or different holiday
schedules, or something else entirely.

[nggallery id=167]

### Tuscany {#Tuscany}

After Florence, we rented a car and drove south through the hillside towns,
castles, and wineries of Tuscany. The driving and scenery was great, just as
picturesque and romantic as you've heard. It also drove home just how good we
have it in San Francisco. Napa and Sonoma are just as beautiful, if not as
historic, and we also have beaches, forests, skiing, and all sorts of scenery
and activities within driving distance. We can definitely count our blessings.

Tuscany's history mirrors that of the rest of the world: lots of fighting
punctuated by intermittent, brief truces. The stone towers, turrets, and
fortified walls reflected this. I enjoyed following the architecture through the
centuries as first the houses, then larger buildings, then whole towns joined
together to defend themselves against outsiders like the insatiable Florentine
Medicis.

### Monteriggioni {#Monteriggioni}

Monteriggioni was our first stop on the road trip. It's a classic, pretty little
Tuscan town, originally founded as part of the
[Via Francigena](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/) route from X to X.

[nggallery id=168]

### Siena {#Siena}

Siena felt smaller than Florence, but otherwise it was very similar. Evidently
they fought and feuded for centuries, thanks to the stubborn Carpuccis and
Medicis, but that didn't stop them from building in the same way.

We climbed the [Torre del Mangia]() to check out the view, and the sprawl of
rooftops and plazas and vaulted arches reminded me of [Assassin's Creed](), of
all things. Its development team is known for meticulous research and attention
to detail, and it shows. I'd only seen Siena in the game, but my (virtual)
memories were still more vivid than of many other places I'd visited in real
life.

[nggallery id=169]

### San Gimignano {#San_Gimignano}

We spent a few nights in
[San Gimignano](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Gimignano), a scenic fortified
hillside town that's now overrun with tourists just like us. Our hotel looked
directly out onto the main square, which gave us both a good view and a serenade
by the classical guitarist who played each night.

San Gimignano also fortified us with more great Italian food, notably the wild
boar tagliatelle and pesto gnocchi at [Antica Trattoria Maceliera]() and the
zuppa di farro and braised boar and deer at [Vecchie del Mura]().

[nggallery id=170]

### San Galgano {#San_Galgano}

[San Galgano](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/San_Galgano) is a medieval monastery
famous for its own sword in a stone. As the legend goes, Saint Galgano foreswore
his knighthood, took up a monk's robes, and built a new chapel on a hilltop.
When he realized he had no cross, he drove his sword deep into a rock to serve
as a substitute, and it remains there to this day.

[nggallery id=171]

### Montepulciano {#Montepulciano}

[Montepulciano](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montepulciano), another classic
hillside town, was our last stay in Tuscany.

[nggallery id=172]

