ATV accident

<img class="right shadow" src="upside_down_atv.jpg" />

I was in an interesting accident over the holiday break this year.
[Like last year](arizona_christmas), Gina and I went out with her brother and
father to ride on their ATVs and shoot their guns. Unlike last year, I rolled
one of the ATVs on a tight turn and landed upside down, on my head, with the ATV
on top of me. I'd accidentally picked a fight with a half ton of steel and
rubber, and I lost big time.

It was definitely my fault. I was coming from a
[side by side](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Side_by_Side_%28UTV%29), which has
way better handling and grip, and I wasn't careful enough with the ATV. Worse,
most of the turns had embankments on the outside, but I picked one with a six
foot ditch instead. Going into the turn, I felt the ATV understeer and lose
grip, and I managed to brake to almost a complete stop, but didn't quite keep it
on the trail. I rocked, then neatly highsided all the way over onto my head.

I ended up upside down, my head pinned between the handlebars and a rock. I
tried to pull myself out, but I was stuck. Shit. OK, deep breath, try again, but
no luck. I tried to push the ATV up with my leg, then with both legs. Still no
luck. I paused to catch my breath and reassess. Yup, still stuck. I pushed
again, my heart pumping enough adrenaline this time to wriggle my head out. I
was free.

I scrambled to my feet, shaky and unsteady and bloodied all over. I wiggled my
toes, then my fingers, then - gingerly - my neck and head. Everything checked
out. Probably no neck or spinal damage, thank God.

My next thought was concussion. I closed one eye, then the other. My vision was
ok. I wasn't nauseous or dizzy. I hadn't lost consciousness. Did I remember
where I was? What I was doing? What day it was? Yes, yes, yes.

I probed my head and face where they'd landed on the rocks, feeling for the
sharp pain of a broken bone. I felt raw and sore all over, but no sharp pain. My
cheek and upper right teeth were a bit numb, but otherwise I'd escaped with
nothing more than scrapes and bruises. Thank God for that helmet and good old
fashioned luck!

Gina's dad found me after a minute. He checked me out, then sped off to grab
Gina and her brother. We packed some ice onto my face, rode back to the trucks,
loaded the ATVs, and drove the hour home.

When we got there, they checked out my face again. Everything still seemed ok,
so we figured I'd caught a massively lucky break. As they continued to poke and
prod, though, I started to notice a little tap, then a click, then a tiny but
distinct crunch. Hrm. Those were not good signs. Reluctantly, I agreed to go to
the hospital to get an X-ray.

An hour in the hospital waiting room, another hour waiting to get a
[CT scan](2010-11-17_ct_scan), another hour for the radiologist to read the
results. I still thought I was fine, and the waiting cemented my certainty...but
I was wrong. When the doctor finally arrived, he told me I had not one but a
raft of broken bones across the right side of my face, with more than one chunk
of bone twisted far out of place. Well, shit. Didn't see that coming.

He didn't know if I'd need surgery, so he arranged for a transfer to a nearby
trauma center. The EMTs arrived, strapped me to a gurney, and put an IV in my
arm, my first ever and a clear sign that The Hospital had its claws in me and
wasn't letting go. Sigh. Flat on my back and immobilized, they rolled me down
the halls I'd walked just hours before - my first stretcher ride of many to come -
and into an ambulance that whisked me away.

When I arrived at the trauma hospital, a team of ER doctors greeted me with a
flurry of activity and equipment. They soon realized I wasn't dying and drifted
away, leaving me to more waiting, more CT scans, and a proper hospital where I'd
stay for the night (another first).

Nurses came to poke and prod me, take my vital signs, and inform me that since I
was potentially pre-op, I couldn't eat or drink anything, even water. It was
midnight, almost ten hours since the accident, and I was dying for water.
Instead, they plugged me into fluids, which did nothing for my thirst.

The night passed in a blur of tangled IV cords and too-small sheets, reading and
texting in fits and starts, peeing in a cup, and endless blood pressure cuffs
and thermometers. The one silver lining was that it didn't hurt - it never had,
really - so I could turn down all the pain meds. (I don't like medication.)

The next morning, a nurse brusquely told me to go to the bathroom and wash
with Hibiclens as part of the standard pre-surgery routine. Uh, what? Surgery?
Yes, surgery. She didn't know anything more. I said thanks for the offer, but
this was elective surgery, and I wasn't about to do it without a lot more
research.

The [surgeon](http://www.jcl.com/news/reconstructive-surgery) arrived soon
after, looking nonplussed. He said it was
[semi-elective](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elective_surgery), in his opinion,
but he gave me more details, showed me the raw scans, and happily agreed to bump
me back to an evening slot to let me do more research. I asked about his success
and infection rates, and he said they were 100% and 0%, respectively. Seemed too
good to be true. I asked if we could do it with local anasthetic instead of
general, and he just laughed.

I read up on him and the procedure, talked to Gina and my family, and thought
through the options. My eye socket was broken at the top, side, and bottom. Left
as is, my eyeball would gradually sink and I'd start to see double and lose
vision. My cheekbone was broken all over and pushed far into my sinus cavity,
destroying what [little sinus capacity](2011-07-01_health_stuff) I'd had to
begin with.

The fix was to go in through a number of incisions, realign the bones, and
attach them with titanium screws and a small plate so they'd stay in place. I
wasn't happy about it, but none of the alternatives made sense. I was going to
have surgery. Ugh.

Gina had been back and forth between the hospital and home, and she sat down
with me to write a quick power of attorney, DNR, and living will. We were
overreacting a bit, sure, but I'd never had surgery before and I was nervous and
scared. She was too.

The waiting was interminable. They finally wheeled me away, on my back again,
only to leave me in the pre-op staging area for another hour. When my
anaesthesiologist arrived, I told her about my high metabolism and drug
tolerance and asked her to skip the morphine. She laughed as she fed the general
anaesthetic into my IV.

When I woke up, the surgeon floated into my tunnel vision and said the surgery
was "perfect." I thought, through the fog, that I'd had enough of both
overstatement and laughter from my doctors.

Gina and her mom met me in my room, relieved and happy. I _still_ wasn't in
pain, but I definitely was excited about drinking water again. That night passed
in another blur of nurses, tangled IVs and sheets, and peeing in a cup. Some
things don't change.

The next morning, I ate food for the first time in two days. Cream of wheat and
bad coffee never tasted too good. As I waited for my follow-up with the surgeon,
I gradually disconnected myself from the machines, put my street clothes back
on, walked around the floor, and annoyed the nurses to no end. When he finally
arrived and discharged me, they were ecstatic.

Recovery has been straightforward so far. My jobs are just to reduce the
inflammation with ice and ibuprofen, the cure for everything, and prevent
infection with a host of strong antiobiotics. It's been a week since surgery,
and the swelling is almost gone. A week more and I'll probably be wearing
contacts again.

I do notice the bones stretching and adjusting sometimes under pressure, when I
bite hard or try to open my mouth wide. They're settling, just like houses. The
nerve damage in my teeth will also take a while longer to heal. Minor
complaints, though. All things considered, I was damn lucky.

And hey, there's even a silver lining. Those titanium screws and plate can go
through airport security, but they can't go into
[my mortal enemy](2009-03-14_mri), the MRI machine. I get a reprieve! It's CT
scans for everything now.

In any case, please welcome me back to the land of the living. I wasn't exactly
happy about the accident, the hospital stay, or the surgery, but I'm definitely
happy I escaped any major damage. Here's to counting our blessings, and to a
healthy new year!


<a class="shutter" href="_thumb.jpg">
  <img class="right shadow" src=".jpg" /></a>


<iframe src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/?rel=0&controls=0"
  class="left shadow" style="border: none" width="150" height="240" frameborder="0"
  allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
