Sailing the Greek Cyclades

<a href="/gallery/eu2012_folegandros/_panoramic_bay.jpg" class="shutter">
  <img class="shadow" src="/gallery/eu2012_folegandros/thumbs/thumbs__panoramic_bay.jpg" /></a>

For the first leg of our
[Mediterranean vacation](http://snarfed.org/2012-06-18_vacation), we sailed
[a catamaran](http://www.anassayachting.gr/) around the Cyclades islands in
Greece. We started on [Sifnos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sifnos), scrapped
our original route to [Mykonos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mykonos) due to
weather, and instead headed south. We sailed a few hours each day, dropped
anchor at a new island each night, and poked around on shore or in kayaks.

Here are a few pictures and thoughts.

<!--more-->
<p/>

### Anassa

Our catamaran [Anassa](http://www.anassayachting.gr/) was 62 feet long and only
a few years old. It was awesome, as was the
[crew](http://www.anassayachting.gr/anassa/the-crew/). They knew their stuff,
but they were still flexible and relaxed and lots of fun to hang out with. They
knew interesting people and places everywhere we went, even when we quickly
dropped off the beaten path.

Evidently Anassa was originally ordered by Roberto Cavalli, the designer, who
turned it down at the last minute because he wanted something bigger. That
explained a few surprising touches like the Italian tile in the bathrooms,
luxurious but wholly unsuited to sailing.

The one odd part was being waited on. I know it's the norm with this kind of
sailing, it just felt awkward. We made friends and spend time with them, but at
the same time they constantly served us food and drinks, wrangled gear for us,
and cleaned up after us. They were great at it, but still, next time I'd
probably ask them to just sail the boat, and we'd all share in the chores.

[nggallery id=157]

### Syros

We started with a ferry from Athens to
[Syros](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syros), which was our first glimpse of
classic Greek island architecture: whitewashed stone, blue trim, built into the
sides of cliffs, dotted with tiny patios, and steps everywhere. Cats everywhere
too. Aww...

When we boarded the boat, our captain Jiorgos christened the voyage with his
friend's homemade dakos (?), a liqueur made with olives and juniper that tasted
like a sweet gin. He pointed out a few of the other boats in the marina,
including a big yacht owned by a friend of a friend who ran a shipping company.
Then we were off!

[nggallery id=158]

### Sifnos

Our first sail ended at [Sifnos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sifnos), where we
docked next to another big yacht. We watched a crowd gather to wait for the
ferry, and the commotion reminded me of old frontier towns. The stagecoach or
train whistle stop was the big event of the day. Everyone stopped what they were
doing and came to hear the news, get their mail, see people off, or welcome them
back. Same with the ferry here.

After dinner, we wandered into the little harbor town to watch Greece play
Germany in the [Euro Cup](http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro/). Jiorgos asked for a
couple hours off to watch, and we said of course, but only if we can tag along!
As expected, everything had stopped and the whole town packed into cafes and
bars to cheer for Greece.

[nggallery id=159]

### Appolonia

[Appolonia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollonia,_Sifnos) is the main town in Sifnos.

[nggallery id=160]

### Kimolos

[Kimolos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kimolos) was the first island that felt
truly secluded. We anchored at a quiet beach, and the water was turquoise,
crystal clear, and mesmerizing.

During our sail, we asked Jiorgos a bit about his sailing experience. Among
other things, he noted that catamarans were more stable and comfortable for
passengers, of course, but they were less maneuverable and clumsier to sail than
monohulls. We sympathized, but we appreciated the cat. We hadn't gotten seasick
yet!

Later, we eavesdropped on a Mayday call over the radio: man overboard. Jiorgos
doubted anyone was close enough to help, and the boat would handle it
themselves, but they were required to make the call. Someone did respond after a
while, but by then they were in the clear.

[nggallery id=161]

### Milos

[Milos](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Milos) marked the high point of Jimmy
Buffet style island sailing: self-sufficient, carefree, and idyllic.

We anchored near a catamaran captained by Jiorgos's friend, who hopped in a
skiff to greet us with a gift of fresh fish. Jiorgos and Vanessa immediately
took it out to the beach to clean and fillet. No sooner had they arrived than
Jiorgos looked down, darted his hand into the water, and came up with a little
octopus! Vanessa proceeded to bash its brains out against a rock, grinning all
the while, and a couple hours later we had grilled fish and braised octopus in
an amazing tomato and herb sauce.

The next day, we kayaked and swam through some amazing sea caves. The only sign
of humanity was a few scattered iron stakes, pounded into the rocks half a
millenia ago by Aegean pirates.

[nggallery id=162]

### Folegandros

[Folegandros](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Folegandros) was yet another damn
beautiful island with yet another damn beautiful cliffside town. We anchored
underneath a restaurant carved into the hillside half a mile from the harbor
town. They'd strung an extension cord the whole way for electricity, and brought
in most of their supplies via dinghy. They grilled us octopus, calamari, fava
beans, and vegetables, and we loved it all. The panoramic picture we took there
is my favorite of the trip.

[nggallery id=163]

### Santorini

After so much blissful seclusion,
[Santorini](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santorini) was culture shock. It's
populated by roughly 60,000 residents and at least that many tourists at any one
time.

The main towns of [Oia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oia,_Greece) and
[Fira](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fira) have kept the classic cliffside Greek
architecture, but inside they're all hotels, restaurants, and boutiques. The
contrast was striking.

The geography was striking too. Santorini used to be a nicely round island, but
thousands of years ago a volcanic eruption sank much of the inland area, leaving
only a C-shaped rim, a desolate caldera in the middle, and a bay whose ocean
floor is riddled with unpredictable spikes and bottomless chasms. We literally
don't know how deep many of them are.

Santorini is also home to [Akrotiri](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akrotiri), the
famously preserved ancient city known as the Pompeii of Greece. It's cool for
archaeologists, but as a tourist, it was a bit underwhelming.
[My mom](http://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=1506309346) claims it doesn't
hold a candle to Pompeii.

[nggallery id=164]

### Athens

We bid farewell to our wonderful boat and crew in Santorini and ferried back to
Athens. Beyond the expected sights, one notable feature was the ubiquitous
graffiti. Locals claimed it's exploded recently due to the protests over
austerity and uncertainty about the country's future.

Vanessa hung out in the city square one night, getting to know the local kids
and drinking beer through a straw. When she asked if the police would care, she
immediate heard, "Don't worry, there are no police in Greece." Touch√©.

[nggallery id=165]
