Reconsidering my politics

<a class="shutter" href="american_thinker_poster.jpg">
  <img class="right shadow" src="american_thinker_poster_thumb.jpg" /></a>

For a long time, I thought economic inequality was basically OK. Unfortunate
yes, undesirable definitely, but not inherently bad. I changed my mind recently,
and I've been reflecting on why and what I can learn from it.

 
The stock complaints about inequality always seemed to boil down to the same
thing: fairness. Inequality is unfair, so it's wrong. I'm human, so I'm
[naturally sensitive to fairness](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolutionary_ethics#Descriptive_evolutionary_ethics),
but it still didn't sit right with me. I didn't see the concrete harm. A rising
tide lifts all boats, so if poor people still have a good quality of life,
what's wrong with rich people being rich? Plus, incentives are important, so we
want to reward people who work hard and create value, right? Not to mention that
we've never found a reasonable, effective way to prevent inequality. Socialism
and its cousins clearly aren't it.

<!-- more -->
<p/>


I flattered myself and thought I'd worked through the issue, analyzed it from
every angle, and reached the best conclusion. The more likely story is that I
inherited it from my parents and friends, like we all do, adopting arguments
after the fact to rationalize it and satisfy my ego. Regardless, whatever the
reason, I believed it.

Then I started noticing research from people like
[Richard Wilkinson](http://www.ted.com/talks/lang/en/richard_wilkinson.html),
[Jill Eisen](http://www.cbc.ca/ideas/episodes/2012/01/16/left-behind/), and
[The Equality Trust](http://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/) showing the concrete
harm. Wilkinson, for example, compared relative inequality in hundreds of
countries to all sorts of societal indicators - health, divorce, crime, voter
turnout, even trust - and found that they all correlate strongly. The famously
equitable Scandinavian countries, for example, fare well across the board.
Countries like the US...not so much.

I'm an engineer, so I have a natural affinity for research and data. I can't
pinpoint the moment, but after reading enough of this, I found myself convinced.
Relative inequality is inherently harmful.


<img class="left shadow" src="i_voted_sticker_in_grass.jpg" /></a>

This isn't the first time I've changed my mind about politics. I believed in
capital punishment too, a long time ago, until I heard an interesting thought
experiment. When we look back at history and policies like slavery and genocide,
we all agree they're wrong. In 100 years, when people look back at us, what will
they all think we did wrong? I couldn't come up with much, and still can't, but
I figured capital punishment was one candidate. I just couldn't imagine we'd
still be killing people as part of our social contract.


What can I learn from all this? First, I'm sure I'm wrong about lots of other
things too. I'm resigned to the fact that most of my core beliefs are innate,
ingrained in my subconscious early on and only later justified with intellectual
arguments. If those instincts are wrong about capital punishment and inequality,
that's probably just the beginning.

Second, I need to fight to keep an open mind, every minute of every day. I
didn't change my mind because I thought harder or got smarter, but because I
learned new things. That happens all the time, and I need to be ready for it,
even if it's not always easy or fun.

Finally, all this has made me curious about media coverage of politics. I'm a
firm believer that you can't change other people, you can only change yourself,
which makes the usual persuasive editorials and analysis seem odd. They endorse
this candidate, disapprove of that policy, weigh in on this ballot measure...but
how much effect do they really have? How about some storytelling instead, some
personal journeys and heart-wrenching mea culpas?

In any case, thanks for your patience during this bit of navel gazing. I won't
make it a habit, promise.

