pine reply-all patch

<a href="http://washington.edu/pine/">
  <img class="right" src="pine.png" /></a>

For the impatient: Patch for Pine
[4.58](https://github.com/snarfed/patches/pine/reply-all.patch.4.58),
[4.60 and 4.61](https://github.com/snarfed/patches/pine/reply-all.patch.4.60),
[4.63](https://github.com/snarfed/patches/pine/reply-all.patch.4.63),
[4.64](https://github.com/snarfed/patches/pine/reply-all.patch.4.64)  
[Pine source](http://www.washington.edu/pine/getpine/unix.html)
[FAQ on patching pine](http://www.math.washington.edu/~chappa/pine/faq/index.html)

I use [Pine](http://www.washington.edu/pine/) as my email client, and I really
like it. It's fast, simple, full-featured, and very keyboardable. However,
nothing's perfect, even Pine.

Instead of providing separate Reply and Reply All commands, Pine has a single
Reply command that asks you whether you want to reply to all. Unfortunately, as
most [usability experts](http://www.useit.com/papers/webwriting/writing.html)
will attest, [users don't
read](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/uibook/chapters/fog0000000062.html).
Including me. So, since I often want to reply all, I've inadvertently trained
myself to ignore the prompt and just say yes. This is bad because, as we all
know, there are occasions when you most emphatically _do not_ want to reply to
all.

So, I wrote a patch to separate Pine's Reply command into Reply and Reply All
commands, which behave as expected. To patch Pine and build it, first download
the [Pine 4.60 source](http://www.washington.edu/pine/getpine/unix.html) and my
[patch](https://github.com/snarfed/patches/pine/reply-all.patch.4.60). Then, run
these commands to extract, patch, and build Pine.

    $ tar xzvf pine.tar.gz
    $ cd pine4.60
    $ patch -p0 < ../reply-all.patch.4.60
    $ ./build DEBUG=-O lrh

If you download a source package other than the gzip, modify the first command
accordingly. Also, if you're not on Red Hat Linux, modify the last command
accordingly. For more information on patching Pine, see
[Eduardo Chappa's FAQ](http://www.math.washington.edu/~chappa/pine/faq/index.html).

If you do try it out, please [let me know!](about)

**Note:** If you get compile problems with kssl.h and krb5.h when building Pine
on Redhat 9, use this build command:

    $ ./build EXTRACFLAGS='-I/usr/kerberos/include' lrh

In RH9, Redhat moved the Kerberos libraries and headers to /usr/kerberos.
Predictably, this broke every app that compiles against SSL but not
(necessarily) Kerberos. There's a [debate in the bug
listing](http://bugzilla.redhat.com/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=82369) over whether
to blame Redhat, packagers, or app developers...but for our purposes, the
workaround above should be good enough.
