privacy through prepaid credit cards

[![/space/mastercard.jpg](/space/mastercard.jpg)](http://mastercard.com/)
[![/space/amex.jpg](/space/amex.jpg)](http://americanexpress.com/)
[![/space/visa.jpg](/space/visa.jpg)](http://visa.com/)

### Privacy through Prepaid Credit Cards

If you've known me for any length of time, you know that I'm a privacy freak. I
can't explain why, but I'm hyper-sensitive about giving out personal
information. I practically hyperventilate when I consider all the databases of
things I've bought, people I've called, and movies I've watched. I may not be
especially private about some things, but I'll be damned if Safeway
needs my phone number or address to sell me a loaf of bread.

Unfortunately, this can make life complicated. For example, I get all my mail at
work. I didn't get a cell phone until 2010. I buy plane tickets and hotel rooms
with cash. I've frozen my credit report with [all](http://equifax.com/)
[three](http://transunion.com/) [agencies](http://experian.com/). It's
inconvenient, but doable.

The worst part, though, is that I don't use a credit card. I have one, to build
a credit rating, but I only use it to buy gas, so that there's no profile of my
real purchasing habits. This is inconvenient, to say the least. I have to go to
the airport to buy plane tickets. I pay cash for everything. I can't buy
_anything_ online.

To put it bluntly, this sucks. So, I set out on a quest to find an anonymous,
prepaid credit/debit card - in essence, [digital
cash](http://www.cob.sfasu.edu/rgriffith/virtualcash.htm) that I can swipe at
Amazon as well as the checkout counter.

If you're in a hurry, here's the executive summary: I use
[Simon gift cards](https://www.simon.com/giftcard/).
I buy them in person at a Simon mall, and overall, I'm pretty happy with them.
They may not be perfect, but they're close.

### Candidates

There are _lots_ of prepaid credit cards out there.
[cardreport.com](http://www.cardreport.com/dirs/prepaid.html) is a good place
to start. Also, there's a [Google Answers
question](http://answers.google.com/answers/threadview?id=277200) that provides
a fairly comprehensive list of issuers. However, only a few come close to my
requirements. Here's the short list.

  * [Green Dot](http://greendotonline.com/)
  * [WebSecret](http://websecretcard.com/) _(a Green Dot brand, discontinued)_
  * [PrivaCash](https://secure.privacash.com/) _(affilated with Green Dot)_
  * [Morgan Beaumont](http://www.morganbeaumont.com/)
  * [ecount](http://ecount.com/defaultecount.asp)
  * [Wired Plastic](http://www.wiredplastic.com/)
  * [Vaya](http://corp.ecount.com/prod/rf.html)
  * [Elite Plus](http://www.elitepluscardapp.com/)
  * [PayPal](http://paypal.com/)
  * [Bank of America Gift Card](http://bankofamerica.com/giftcard/)
_(discontinued)_
  * Mall gift cards: [Simon](https://www.simon.com/giftcard/), [Westfield](http://westfield.com/uscentres/giftcards/), etc.
  * [Swiss Bankers Travel Cash](https://www.travelcash.ch/)
  * [International Money Transfer Card](http://www.imtcard.com/)

### Personal information

The card's issuer shouldn't ask for much personal information. If they do, they
shouldn't actually use or verify it. Social Security number, driver's license,
passport, birthdate, and phone number are all things I'm not willing to give up.
Ideally, I don't even want the cardholder's name to be mine. I am willing to
give some personal information, though, such as address and email. I'm also
willing to lie about the rest.

Unfortunately, the federal government recently passed a law that requires all
credit card issuers to collect SSNs. This was post-9/11, so I assume the
motivation was tracking terrorists' finances. Some go even further; [Morgan
Beaumont](http://www.morganbeaumont.com/)'s [application
form](http://www.morganbeaumont.com/support_apply.cfm), for example, asks for a
copy of your passport or drivers license! No thanks.

Pretty much all issuers have complied, but fortunately, the law only requires
that the issuer _collect_ SSNs. Most don't actually do anything with them.
Whenever a prepaid card issuer requires me to provide an SSN, I just make one
up. Not one of them has complained yet!

_Update_: Other post-9/11 federal laws, such as the PATRIOT Act, are also
rearing their ugly heads. Interpretation is still up in the air, but most
financial institutions are erring on the side of collecting more rather than
less, and verifying what they collect. For example, Green Dot recently started
running credit checks against the SSN and birthdate you give them. No more fake
info!

Here's an example disclaimer:

> The USA PATRIOT Act is a Federal law that requires all financial institutions
to obtain, verify, and record information that identifies each person who opens
an account. You will be asked to provide your name, address, date of birth, and
other information that will allow us to identify you. You may also be asked to
provide documentation as proof of identification.

Sigh...

### Purchase and Reload

I'd like to be able to buy prepaid cards in person, with cash. It'd be nice if
there were many convenient locations, but I don't mind going out of my way.

[Green Dot](http://getmygreen.com/locator.aspx) and [Morgan Beaumont
site](http://www.morganbeaumont.com/support_loadlocations.cfm) do this well; you
can buy their cards at common chain stores like Long's Drugs, Rite-Aid, and
7-Eleven. Some cards, like Wired Plastic, can be bought at [Western Union
SwiftPay](http://www.westernunion.com/info/osSwiftPay.asp?country=US). Other
cards, like Elite Plus Visa, can be bought at most major banks. Yet other cards,
like Vaya, can be paid for by mailing a check or money order. Finally, some
banks sell prepaid cards outright, but they usually require you to have an
existing account.

Once you've acquired a prepaid card and start using it, it will eventually run
out of funds. At that point, you can either buy a new card or add funds to your
existing card, also known as recharging or reloading.

Recharging is definitely preferable to buying a new card, since the new card
would have a new number. If you used the card to pay any recurring bills, such
as [Netflix](http://netflix.com/) or [Vonage](http://vonage.com/) ([which I
love](/space/2004-12-24_its_the_phone_stupid)), you'd have to switch each of those services
to the new card number. Unfortunately, many prepaid cards aren't rechargeable at
all.

### The dregs

I'm willing to live with the inconvenience of switching card numbers. However,
there's always a small amount of money remaining on the card that I can't use.
It's not enough to buy whatever I'd normally buy, and I'm not inclined to buy a
bunch of little things that I don't need just to squeeze out the rest of my
money. It's my money, after all!

Ideally, major e-commerce sites would let you use multiple credit cards to pay
for a purchase, specifying the amount to charge to each card. Restaurants have
done this forever, but I don't know of any sites that do. If you're in this
predicament, consider donating to your favorite
[non-profit](http://www.eff.org), [web site](http://penny-arcade.com/), or
[other worthy cause](http://mytwofrontteeth.org/). You can specify the exact
remainder on your card as the amount to donate.

### Credit Reporting

The main target audience for prepaid cards is people with bad credit. So, a few
issuers offer the "feature" of monthly reporting to credit agencies. This may be
good if you need to build up good credit fast, but I don't, and I sure as hell
don't want them voluntarily reporting anything to anyone. Watch out for this.

### Acceptability

The card should work like a normal Mastercard, Visa, or Discover card, without
exception. I should be able to use it anywhere those cards are accepted,
especially online. Having said that, I'd only use the card to pay for things
online, like [Netflix](http://netflix.com/) and [Vonage](http://vonage.com/).

So, I only need the card number and CVV; I don't really need an actual physical
card. However, a physical card does help in some cases. When I buy airline
tickets and hotel rooms with a prepaid card, it helps to have the physical card
when I check in.

Also, if your goal is privacy, there's still an open question. Some card
issuers, mostly the ones that support retail purchase, don't ask for cardholder
name or address. (This may have changed since 9/11.) If a merchant checks
cardholder name and address when they authorize a purchase, could I use a name-
or address-free card with that merchant? If so, how?

### Fees

I expect that I'll pay extra for the privilege of using a prepaid card. I don't
mind activation fees or yearly fees, but I'm not inclined to pay a monthly fee
(e.g. Green Dot), and there's no way in hell I'm going to pay a fee per
transaction. Also, the activation fees for some cards are prohibitively large.
Elite Plus charges $150! No thanks.

### The Verdict

I currently use [Simon gift cards](https://www.simon.com/giftcard/), and I'm
happy with them. They're not reloadable, but they take up to $500, accept cash,
and don't even ask for my name, much less my address or SSN. Plus, their [web
interface](https://www.simon.com/giftcard/) is fast, friendly, and lets you
connect _any_ name and address you want to each card, so you can use them
with merchants that do [AVS
checks](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_Verification_System).

Before Simon, I used [WebSecret](http://websecretcard.com/), which was great,
but expensive, and ultimately discontinued. Before that, I used [Bank of
America gift cards](http://bankofamerica.com/giftcard/), which were also
discontinued. They required name, address, and SSN, which I fabricated, but
still didn't like. Worse, they only allowed purchase with another credit or
debit card. Simon cards are much better!

Apart from prepaid credit and debit cards, there are
[many](http://www.paypal.com/) [promising](http://ecount.com/defaultecount.asp)
[digital](http://www.propay.com/) [cash](http://www.e-gold.com/)
[providers](http://www.mondexusa.com/) that provide good security and anonymity.
Some are even up and running, and you can use them to buy things, but none are
widely accepted. Credit card networks like Mastercard, Visa, Discover, etc. are
still the top dogs in terms of acceptability, but provide little true security
and absolutely no anonymity. Hybrid systems like PayPal have made inroads, but
only a little. Worse, they're slowly leaning towards the credit card model,
losing most of their anonymity in the process.

I fear I'll never have a payment instrument that's widely accepted and anonymous
enough to satisfy me. I'll keep looking, though...

See also:

  * [Quick Anon Plastic](http://tcftalk.com/clairefiles/index.php?PHPSESSID=1a0ae67cc49ef707f6fceec408840268&topic=8123.0) (at [Clairefiles](http://tcftalk.com/clairefiles/))
  * [Currency Cards: Like Having Gold in your Wallet](http://www.escapeartist.com/efam/73/Currency_Cards.html) (at [EscapeArtist](http://www.escapeartist.com/))
  * [faking out address and credit card forms](/space/faking_out_address_and_credit_card_forms)
  * [view evites anonymously](/space/view_evites_anonymously)
  * [kodak picturecenter hacks](/space/kodak_picturecenter_hacks)
  * [change firefox's saved passwords](/space/change_firefoxs_saved_passwords)

