servlets with snipsnap
![/space/snipsnap.png](/space/snipsnap.png)![/space/jetty.png](/space/jetty.png)[Snipsnap](/space/Snipsnap),
the server that runs this site, is based on [Jetty](http://jetty.mortbay.com/),
a standards based, pure java servlet container and web application server.
Snipsnap is implemented on top of Jetty as a framework of servlets. Among other
things, this means that you can configure the Jetty inside Snipsnap to serve
_your_ servlets, JSPs, or anything else too! Here's how.

First, you'll need to configure Jetty to serve some part of your site outside of
Snipsnap. To do this, read my tutorial on [virtual host
redirection](/space/virtual host redirection).

Done? Great. Now, all you need to do is decide which pages you want Jetty to
handle as JSPs, servlets, or whatever. You can specify everything in one
directory, e.g. /servlets/, or all files with a specific extension, e.g. \*.jsp.
In your jetty.conf, in the **<Call name="addContext">** element, add a servlet
handler for those files:


    <Call name="addHandler">

      <Arg>

       <New class=

          "org.mortbay.jetty.servlet.ServletHandler">

        <Call name="addServlet">

          <Arg>JSP</Arg>

          <Arg>*.jsp</Arg>

         <Arg>

          org.apache.jasper.servlet.JspServlet

         </Arg>

        </Call>

        </New></Arg>

    </Call>

Add this handler _before_ the ResourceHandler that handles your static html
files. (The file mappings are matched against in the order that they appear.)

If you want to handle different files, or use a different servlet, replace the
parameters with whatever you want. For example, if you want to use dynamic
servlets, use **org.mortbay.jetty.servlet.Invoker** instead of
**org.apache.jasper.servlet.JspServlet**. If you're interested, the [Jetty
documentation](http://jetty.mortbay.com/jetty/tut/Server.html#nonwebapps) has
more information.

See also:

  * [virtual host redirection](/space/virtual host redirection)

  * [snipsnap register without email](/space/snipsnap register without email)

  * [snipsnap script macro and python](/space/snipsnap script macro and python)

  * [snipscrape](/space/snipscrape)

  * [snipsnap 1.0b1 virtual hostname patch](/space/snipsnap 1.0b1 virtual
hostname patch)

  * [snipsnap comment without login patch](/space/snipsnap comment without login
patch)

  * [snipsnap macros](/space/snipsnap macros)

  * [snipsnap recent-changes snip name patch](/space/snipsnap recent-changes
snip name patch)

